Welcome to Cloud Native Compass,
a podcast to help you navigate the vast
landscape of the cloud native ecosystem.
We're your hosts. I'm David Flanagan, a technology
magpie that can't stop playing with new shiny
things. I'm Laura Santa Maria, a forever learner
who is constantly breaking production. EBPF
is Turing complete and can be written in
Rust. So, obviously, I'm sold. That's just two
of the things we learned on today's episode.
Want to learn more? Contrary to not so
popular belief, eBPF is not some secret Berkeley
green project that's out there to eat your
refrigerator,
but it is a gateway to becoming a
Linux kernel maintainer.
If you're curious about what e p eBPF
is, why it matters, how to pronounce it,
and how badly you can break your kernel
when trying to learn it, this is the
episode for you as we talk with Liz
Rice,
the author of Learning eBPF
and Chief Open Source Officer at ISOVAILENT.
Alright. Thank you. Les, could you please say
hello and tell us a little bit more
about you?
Hi. Yeah. So my name is Liz Rice.
I am chief open source officer at ISOVAILENT,
which is the company that originally created Cilium.
And,
a lot of people will have heard of
Cilium
being based on eBPF.
And earlier this year, I published a book
about eBPF called learning eBPF.
I feel like I may have answered more
than one question in one go there.
Hey. No. That's fine. That's fine. Little bit
of context. Just us perfect. Yeah. Good context.
Because I'm doing we're about to talk about
eBPF
and go into a little bit more detail
there. So yeah. Awesome.
Alright. Well, let's just start. You know, not
everyone is
familiar with eBPF. So could you give us
the the TLDR? What do people need to
know to understand the rest of the conversation
today?
So they don't need to know what it
stands for.
It stands for extended Berkeley packet filter. But,
honestly,
forget that. It doesn't really help because it
does a lot more than packet filtering now.
So we tend to say the acronym doesn't
really mean anything anymore.
And what it really is is the ability
to run programs
within the within the kernel, within the operating
system kernel. So we can dynamically
change the way that the kernel behaves
by
loading these eBPF programs.
And I think when I say that, I
have to make sure that people really know
what I mean
when I say the kernel.
The kernel is the part of the operating
system that interfaces
between our applications
and the hardware
that the, you know, processor and and its
peripherals.
So if you are writing to a file,
you're doing anything over the network, writing anything
to screen,
even allocating memory,
the kernel has to get involved. Your application
can't do it directly. It has to ask
the kernel for help.
And the kernel is also coordinating
all the different processes that might be running
on the machine. And that means the kernel
is involved whenever you're doing anything interesting,
really.
So it's a really great place to write
things like observability
tools and security tools, and we can do
that with eBPF.
And we also get to customize the way
that the kernel behaves for the things that
it takes on, things like the networking stack.
We can modify the way that behaves with
eBPF. So it's really powerful and a really
interesting way to
instrument
all of your different applications
that are running on that one kernel.
Nice.
And here I was hoping you could I
was gonna say, here I was hoping you
could actually explain why it said Berkeley in
the middle of all of it, but that's
a whole another thing, guess, more than anything
else. The original
bucket
filter
paper
was written by
two people whose names I can't quite remember
right now,
but they were at Berkeley at the time.
So it was Okay. You know, the Okay.
That makes me recite now. That it all
originates from says,
like Lawrence Berkeley Lab or however you say
that's called. Yeah. You know, just for fun
for somebody like me who's like, why does
it say Berkeley?
Okay.
Anyway.
So I I'm curious then. Did
you join eBPF because you were really interested
in eBPF, or are you now really interested
in eBPF because you've joined eBPF?
Like, what came first? No.
I really got interested in eBPF.
The first time I heard of it, I
saw Thomas Graff, who is the CTO of
eBPF,
talking about psyllium and eBPF at back
in 2017.
And at the time, I thought, well, that's
pretty interesting technology.
And at that point, it was really cutting
edge in the kernel. You needed you know,
it wasn't available to most people in production.
It wasn't available to hardly anybody in
the Linux distributions that they were using back
then.
But I thought this is a really interesting
technology,
and,
I kinda kept an eye on it. A
couple of years later, I started working on
a project that was,
sort of using eBPF.
And I was also as part of learning
about it myself, I was going out and
doing talks. I I find that, you know,
the best way to make sure you really
understand it is to try and explain something
to somebody else.
So,
yeah, I've started doing talks about eBPF as
well. And through that,
actually got invited back to the eBPF
summit in, I guess, 2020,
which, iSurveillance put on sort of on behalf
of the eBPF community.
And there was so much really cool stuff
going on,
you know, in the world of eBPF and
particularly at iSurveillance.
It turns out I hadn't realized before that
summit just how much
iSurveillance had been involved with eBPF right from
the get go. So Daniel Borkman, who's one
of the three maintainers of eBPF in the
kernel, was, you know, one of the early
engineers at ISOvalent, and he's still there. So,
you know,
we're so embedded
in the way that eBPF has developed over
the years. It's it's, you know, I I
really do get to work with the
the people who created it and the people
who've been using it and had the vision
for building things like Cilium.
You know? So, yeah, I joined ISA Bayland
because it's
just absolutely full of really cool people doing
really fun things with eBPF.
Awesome. Makes sense. So you started experimenting with
eBPF in in 2017. We're now in the
latter half of 2023,
which just seems absurd to me now. But,
like, over those years, you've seen the adoption
grow as we all have, especially across the
the industry and even the CNCF with projects
like PEXA and Falco and, of course, Cilium
as well. Why
has that adoption
grown so quickly for a relatively niche? I
don't know. Is that a niche technology? I
think it is. Like,
why are people point, I don't know. I
don't know. It seems like it's kinda everywhere.
So Yeah. It's one of those things that,
I I guess,
expertise in it is pretty niche, but a
lot of people are using it without really
even knowing that they're using it. I mean,
there's probably people using Cilium who don't realize
that it's based on eBPF.
Certainly, a lot of people will be using
things like TCP dump and
never really sort of thought about eBPF, but
and that that's fine. That's you know, there's
so many really
powerful tools that have been built.
I I think, you know,
things that Brendan and Greg
have popularized,
you know, in the kind of 2017
period, you know, he was already out there
talking about how Netflix were using eBPF for,
observability purposes, for tracing, for, you know, diagnosing
and then improving
performance
issues
and,
you know, really popularizing
the
power of eBPF.
The reason why I think there was that
kind of
sudden upturn
in adoption
is
the fact that
the the level of eBPF support in the
kernel had reached a a point,
I think, around the 04/2018
kernel version around that kind of time frame
is where you really start getting sufficient eBPF
support to do really interesting things. The more
modern your kernel is, the more additional capabilities
in eBPF and probably lots of other areas
of the kernel as well.
And but there was this real turning point
when,
I would say, particularly when RHEL was probably
the last of the distributions to, kind of
it it's it's always, you know, relatively cautious
about upgrading to to new versions of the
kernel.
And at the point where really all of
the distributions were using a modern enough kernel,
that meant
you could just deploy these eBPF based tools
in production regardless of your distro, and I
think that really made a huge difference to
the adoption.
Yeah. Awesome.
So you mentioned the Berkeley packet filter. And
for the people that are not aware, it's
like a networking thing that allows you to
do IP tables like stuff and okay. I
I'm not trying gonna go into it in
any more detail next. I'll I'll make an
absolute best of it. But it does network
unique stuff. Right? It blocks packets. It rewrites
packets. It does all the stuff. But eBPF
has kind of
grown beyond that now. We're seeing it used
for a whole variety of different technologies like
Falco and PEXY.
Is there, like what's the right way to
phrase this question? Really, I should have it
prepared, but why has it extended beyond this?
Why does it have these new capabilities? What
is it enabling within the kernel for people?
Why is it interesting to you and to
others? I know that's a very broad question.
But Yeah. So so I think the the
original
idea of packet filtering was to be able
to look at each incoming packet and say,
you know, make decisions about what to do
with it with that packet.
And I think in the very first place,
it was really just do am I interested
in sort of seeing this packet? I maybe
I want to filter, you know, packets that
are going to a particular port so that
I can count them or something like that.
So it was making fairly simple
decisions
about,
you know, what kind of what to do
with these with these packet filters.
The extended part
involved,
think, a few different trains of thought. One
was the idea that if you
extended this sort of relatively small instruction set
that could be used to to examine
packets.
If you turn that into something a bit
more kind of
like a virtual machine instruction set,
you know, when if you look at BPF
bytecode, it's very reminiscent of, like, machine code.
You know, it's all about
registers and loading values into registers and and
comparing them and and jumping to other instructions.
It's very,
very similar to to machine code. So there
was this idea that having a
a virtual machine in the kernel
could allow you to do all sorts of
interesting things.
There was the idea that maybe you could
attach these programs to other points in the
kernel, not just to incoming packets, but you
could make
decisions or change the behavior at other points
in the kernel.
And I think the last major thing that
distinguished
extended from from its predecessors is what's called
eBPF maps.
And maps are these data structures that you
can access from
within an eBPF program, and you can share
them between eBPF programs, and you can also
access them using system calls from user space.
So it's it's a way of exchanging information
between user space and eBPF programs or between
multiple different eBPF programs.
And all those things kinda combined
has turned out to be really powerful to
the extent that one of my colleagues recently
did a talk
at one of the kind of Linux kernel
developer conferences where he showed that eBPF is
now Turing complete, which is
pretty cool.
A question just on that. Right? Because, you
know, the talks I've seen, you know, from
yourself and others in this space when you
talk about eBPF, one of the the things
that's always mentioned is the fact that the
eBPF sandbox, the virtual machine
can and should never crash.
Mhmm. Is that is that still true even
with the ability for the eBPF programs to
communicate with each other and with user space
programs?
Yeah. Exactly. So the
reason we're able to make that claim is
because of a
thing in the kernel called the eBPF verifier.
So as you load a program into the
kernel, it goes through this verification process, which
is really analyzing all the possible paths through
the program
and
ensuring that well, first of all, it will
run to completion.
So this
a long time ago, that used to mean
no loops at all. Now that's been, kind
of improved and optimized and you can have
loops.
It's,
checking for things like, there's only a limited
set of what's called helper functions that you
can make from an eBPF program,
and the set that you can call depend
on really the event that triggered it. So
if you
were being triggered because a network packet arrived,
then you can call helper functions that are
related to looking at that network packet.
But you can't,
for example, ask for what's the user space
process associated with this packet because there is
no user space process associated
at that time.
Whereas if you were in
an eBPF program attached to
a user space program making a system call,
then you absolutely could ask
a helper function to give you the the
process ID. So the verifier is checking that
all this sort of contextual
helper functions are being used appropriately
and that memory access is safe,
that if you're gonna dereference a pointer, you
have to explicitly check that it's not nil
before you do so because dereferencing a nil
pointer, if, you know, anybody has ever written
a c program, they will have crashed their
c program by dereferencing a nil pointer. I
guarantee it.
Mhmm.
Yeah. So the the verify is really just
checking that that program is safe to run.
Safe in the sense that it can't crash
the machine, that memory access is safe.
Because it can't tell the difference between,
you know, maybe I'm a legitimate networking packet
that's,
an legitimate
eBPF program that's filtering network packets.
You know, maybe I'm protecting against DDoS attacks,
or maybe I'm a malicious eBPF program, and
I am just
throwing away packets for fun. Yeah. The verifier
can't tell the difference between those two things.
But when we talk about being safe to
run-in this context, we really mean it's not
gonna crash or hang the machine.
Okay.
Cool. And I think worth pointing thinking face
on this. Yeah. I've got my thinking face
on. Sorry.
Go ahead. Go ahead, Liz. No. Keep going.
Keep going.
Well,
it's the the thing that really distinguishes eBPF
from writing a kernel module. So you always
could extend the kernel, always,
for a very long time. You've been able
to extend the kernel by writing kernel modules,
but
people are pretty reluctant to install kernel modules
because
it's
if if there is some kind of bug
in it, if it does crash, it's gonna
bring down the whole machine and there's no
kind of safety net like what the eBPF
verifier is bringing. Makes sense.
So out of curiosity,
like, obviously, we're talking a lot more in-depth
kernel kind of things. And, obviously, you referenced
if you've ever developed a c program, you
know what this is like in a machine
code and things like that. Who would you
say are probably the
most common user that you encounter or, like,
the the people who are really using this
the most? Who do you think this is
the most relevant for, I guess, right now?
So
lots of people will use eBPF
through
tooling that's built on it. So, I mean,
David mentioned, you know, there's various different projects
in the CNCF.
There's
all the,
BPF trace and and,
the BCC family of tools that people can
use on the command line to do observability.
There's there's lots of different
tools that have been built on
eBPF as a platform. And I think for
the vast majority of people, that's how they'll
really experience it. They'll use things like Cilium
or,
you know, Falco or Pixi, and they
may
be interested in the fact that it's using
eBPF, but they don't actually have to get
involved in the details,
which turns out to be a really good
thing because, I mean, I'm I'm the sort
of person who really wants to understand, you
know, like, how the sausage is made. I
I I I wanna kinda get inside and
get a feel for, like, how is this
really working?
You can
learn about eBPF programming.
You know, it's relatively easy to get, you
know, things like a hello world or or,
you know, some basic networking capabilities
running in eBPF programs that you've written yourself.
But you do quite quickly start hitting
the point where
you're interacting with kernel data structures. And at
that point, you kinda need to understand what
those data structures represent and what the effect
of you changing them might have.
So it it does quite quickly turn into
kernel programming.
So I kinda say that on the one
hand, most people just don't need to know
anything about the details of it at all.
But if they're interested, it's
relatively accessible for people who are comfortable with
programming to to kind of dip your toe
in.
And then if you really wanna become an
expert eBPF programmer,
which I, by no means, consider myself at
all,
that really does start to require
kind of kernel expertise.
But, fortunately, I work with lots of people,
I said, I don't who have that kernel
expertise.
So would you say this is the the
gateway to actually becoming a Linux maintainer?
Honestly, yes. Yes.
I
I've not done it, but it never crossed
my mind that I would ever make a
contribution to the Linux kernel. But now I've
kind of in that world, I sort of
start to think, you know, if if I
had another twenty five hours in the day,
that would come of there.
The temptation is high to go get involved.
I understand.
I've asked my one obligatory question, David. Now
it's your turn.
Thanks. No.
I'd like I'd like that I like that
discussion. Right? Because it's it's one of those
questions. Like, I do a couple of talks
on that touch on eBPF. Right? I don't
go deep on it because I'm not that
smart. But I always do the same demos.
And this is iovisor
bPFCC
tools demo.
Mhmm. Specifically, I show off exact snip
and open snip because,
you know, in the SRE platform, DevOps world,
it's quite interesting and important from a security
perspective and an automation perspective to be able
to show when certain sensitive files are opened
on a desk. And eBPF makes that really,
really simple. And another really cool demo is
just by using execsnoop,
you can actually monitor for sudo and site
UID bit one binaries on the machine. And
so when people elevate their privileges, you can
get notifications for that kind of stuff too.
And the question is always like, how much
do I need to know about eBPF to
then start doing tools similar to that? And
then you show them the source code and
there's like 20 lines of Python. It's not
a lot to do these kind of things.
And I think that's because
I feel that people can start to build
eBPF programs just in traces without going deep
into it. In the same way that with
containers,
we can all run containers on our machine,
but you don't really need to understand what
a control group as our namespaces anymore.
I feel like eBPF may make that same
transition probably already has made that same transition.
So I'm gonna flip that around a little
bit and throw the question to Liz.
If people do see these demos, they listen
to this and they're like, okay. EBPF is
really cool.
What are the languages and the SDKs that
they can go and start to work with
right away to experiment with the the new
tech? Yeah. So you kinda have to answer
that question in two parts. There's
the
actual eBPF program itself that's gonna run-in the
kernel, and then there's the user space part
that might interact with it. There are some
occasions where you don't even need a user
space part. So, for example, if you're doing
networking
functions,
sometimes they don't need any kind of user
space interaction because you can just load them
into the kernel and they can they can
do what they need to do. But, usually,
we're gonna have both these parts.
For the kernel,
the program's gonna be in
ultimately, it's going to be in eBPF byte
court byte code form talked about. There being
these byte code instructions that look like machine
code.
You could just write the machine code by
hand. Apparently, there are people who do that.
But,
you know, for for for me, I I
would rather write in a in a slightly
higher language than that. And the languages
are restricted by being
they have to be able to compile down
to bytecode.
So,
the compilers that support it right now are
Clang,
GCC with both of which can compile c
and also the Rust compiler.
I'm not aware of there being other
programs that support BPF bytecode as a
target.
So,
yeah, c or
rust really become your choice there.
There is a little bit of a caveat
in that. There is this project called Iovisor
BCC.
David mentioned the the tools and and things
like OpenSnoop and ExecSnoop that come from that
project.
And
BCC
gives you
some
friendly
kind of macros
such that you can write your code in
a sort of hybrid of Python and c,
and it and it takes cares of a
few takes care of a few things for
you,
from your from your c programs.
But then there's this the user space side
of things,
and there you have a much wider choice.
I mean,
really,
you're you're
not restricted at all except that you probably
want some SDKs that will make system calls
for you and make it easier for you
to interact
with
the eBPF program through that syscall interface.
There are
there's a Go
SDK. There's a Rust
SDK.
In fact, there's a couple of Go ones.
And there's a c one, which is probably,
I would say, today, the most widely used
called LibBPF.
It Cillium uses
Go. We have a a Go eBPF
library,
but I think a lot of the projects
outside outside of that probably directly using LibBPF.
Yeah. You said one thing there that I
completely disagree with, and it's you said you
have a choice between Rust and Sea. That's
not a choice. I knew this was coming.
I knew
it.
Of course, David's gonna talk about Rust. I'm
gonna just break in before he gets going
on it.
It occurs to me there
was the mention of when
containers came around and things like that, things
kind of changed.
And as there are more and more languages
that people are familiar with that you can
compile down to the eBPF bytecode.
How often do you find people getting into
trouble like they used to do when containers
first came around?
Because they didn't quite know what they were
doing but they kind of got it enough
to get away with it. So how often
do you find people getting in trouble and
like, how do you get them out? Like,
that's always my question. It's like, how do
you troubleshoot this thing?
Especially when this is like kernel level and
you can really, really mess things up fast.
Yeah.
I I would say that there's probably two
major ways that people get caught out.
One of them is around the kind of
the tool chain and installing things that are
compatible with each other because Got it. You
know, every kernel version has different eBPF support,
and then you need, you know, maybe your
user space libraries that maybe are or aren't
compatible and different distributions of Linux might have
different,
you know, versions of different,
either libBPF or or tools, things like the
the BCC tools or,
particularly,
there's a thing called tool that you can
use for managing
BPF programs and making
sure that you've got a compatible
set of
the packages, the source code, the kernel, the
tools that you want can trip you up
in numerous different ways.
And the other thing that catches people out,
once they got everything installed and everything seems
to be compatible and they've started compiling some
code and then they go to load it
into the kernel and they hit verification
errors.
And,
I I would say over over the last
few years, there's been a lot of improvement
in
the kind of information that the verifier gives
you about why it's objecting to whatever it
is it's objecting to. But, I have certainly
there there's a blog post somewhere that describes
the verifier as a fickle
fickle beast, I think it is.
Nice.
Alright.
So,
you know, we've covered a lot about eBPF
so far,
and just kinda to understand the landscape right
now. Like, it's heavily used for networking. Selium
has gone all in on eBPF
even towards the service mesh angle now.
As a villain even though have Tetragon going
for the security angle and trying to help
people with that.
And, you know, we're seeing, like, PEXA and
Falco to do more security and monitoring automated
observability,
all of this stuff.
Is there
as I I don't know if, like, there's
an eBPF maturity curve. Right? But as people
start to do more of it and the
skills become more aware or people are using
it more, will eBPF creep into, like, our
day to day application code? Do you see
people using eBPF to write,
you know, their CMSs
or their, you know, proprietary applications? Like, I
I don't know what those use cases are.
I don't know if they exist. But will
eBPF become more than what it is today?
Which is a bit of a
forward thinking question, but maybe there's some thoughts.
It's really interesting to sort of speculate about
what you could do and also what would
be useful. But I think one interesting parallel
is the way that
networking capabilities
that used to be in user space
have migrated into the kernel.
TCP stack, you know, I am old enough
to remember when that was more commonly in
user space, you know, that you'd you'd use
a TCP library.
And now we we just expect the kernel
to take care of that.
And I think what eBPF will allow us
to do is to gradually
move more of that kind of functionality
into the kernel,
but in a way that doesn't require everybody
to take the the leap at the same
time because
we don't all have to be running the
same eBPF programs.
So I think something like service mesh is
a really great example where,
Cilium as a as a CNI networking component
for for Kubernetes is in this really great
sort of position in the kernel to be
able to, you know, pick up network packets
and put them where they need to be
and
observe them and report on them and do
kind of security related operations on them,
all of which are very much the kind
of things that we expect from a service
mesh.
Today,
we can't do everything in the kernel. I
I mean, theoretically,
I think we could, but in practice,
I think all the kind of layer seven
operations,
we're using a user space proxy to do
that. We're using Envoy to do that.
I think
over time, you know, I expect that in,
you know, some number of years time, we
all of that code will be in the
kernel. But maybe the you know, Kubernetes will
be in the kernel too. Who knows? Maybe
that's kind of future
Yeah. Why not? You know? So fancy rewriting
Kubernetes.
Perhaps we should all do it in Rust
in in eBPF.
David's looking like he might actually do that.
Yeah. No. He might. He might.
I mean, I am not personally writing any
Kubernetes components in Rust, but people are exploring
that these days.
So you never you never know. Right?
I don't trust that statement that you're not
doing it yet.
No.
I I I know. I don't have time.
I'm too busy talking to you.
Alright. Well,
is there anything else, Liz, you would like
us to throw at you to ask before
we we wrap this up? And if it
is just sitting on the top of your
tongue waiting to be said. Sorry. Yeah. No.
There is one thing I would like to
mention, which is the upcoming eBPF summit.
Because if people are interested in, you know,
hearing more about what's going on in in
the kind of eBPF community,
learning more about how it's being used, seeing
some of the kind of interesting
directions that people are going with it, and
learning more about the future of eBPF itself.
EBPF summit, it's online. It's free.
You know, it's a virtual
conference. This is gonna be, I think, the
fourth time that we've held it.
It's on September.
And, yeah, come come join in. If you'll
go to eBPF.io,
you'll find a link to the summit there.
And, yeah, it's it's always been a really
nice kind of community feel event,
so I'm really looking forward to it. Excellent.
Alright. Have you want to shamelessly plug anything
else yourself,
anything else, feel free to mention it now
or forever hold your peace. We'll make sure
all the links end up in the show
notes as well. I guess it would be
remiss of me not to mention learning eBPF.
There you go. Available either for you know,
if you want the PDF version, you can
download that from isavailant.com,
or you can,
you know, order it from your favorite local
bookseller
or get it from Amazon if that's your
bag.
Shop local.
Exactly.
Alright. Well, thank you so much for your
time. Pleasure. Thank you, Liz. Thanks for joining
us. If you wanna keep up with us,
consider subscribing to the podcast on your favorite
podcasting app or even go to cloudnativecompass.fm.
And if you want us to talk with
someone specific or cover a specific topic,
reach out to us on any social media
platform. Until next time when exploring the cloud
native landscape on 3. On three. One,
two,
three.
Forget your compass. Forget your compass.